---
title: "Accelerating SARS-CoV-2l Variant Sequencing with HTCondor" 
date: 2020-11-18T12:00:00+00:00
excerpt: MADISON - David O’Connor, professor at the UW School of Medicine and Public Health, opened HTCondor Week 2021 and dsicussed how his lab could identify the origin of a covid infection and trace community spread of the virus using viral squencing, enabled by high-throughput computing. 
publish: true
--- 

[HTCondor Week 2021](https://agenda.hep.wisc.edu/event/1579/), held May 24 - 28 2021, opened with a bang as world renown researcher [Dave O'Connor](https://experts.news.wisc.edu/experts/david-o-connor), [Medical Foundation Professor of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at the University of Wisconsin-Madison](https://dho.pathology.wisc.edu/), kicked off its start with a discussion of his viral sequencing of SARS-CoV-2l. On May 24th, he launched the event by speaking about accelerating SARS-CoV-2 variant sequencing with HTCondor. Through the power of high throughput computing provided by Center for High Throughput Computing (CHTC), the O'Connor Lab has been able to conduct computational work investigating viruses such as HIV, Zika, and COVID-19. 

With COVID-19 impacting millions around the globe, such research is critical. O'Connor's group has used more than 160 million core hours to aid in sequencing the COVID-19 virus.  In February 2020 at the start of the pandemic, the lab was asked to help sequence the COVID-19 virus. Through a process coined 'deep sequencing,' they generated a large amount of DNA sequencing data in real-time. Such a task used to take an instrument a week or longer to complete the process whereas now it is reduced to a matter of minutes. However, after deep sequencing is completed, data analysis is still needed. Dave O'Connor stated, "This is where CHTC has been absolutely vital in their work." Since the start of the pandemic, the group has generated over 4,000 sequences, which has been done through CHTC resources. They have developed workflows in HTCondor to clean the sequences for quality control, take the sequences from a particular run to demultiplex them, map the reads, and find out how similar it is to other genomes that have been previously mapped in the past. 

Through viral sequencing, the group has discovered the origin of infection amongst outbreaks to find coherent information on the most common places of transmission, which in most cases is the community. This outcome happened to be true amongst healthcare workers at the UW hospital. By sequencing the viruses from the cases associated with outbreaks across campus, the lab traced infections from transmission events such as dorm outbreaks and collegiate football games. The Madison and global community have gained a better understanding of how transmission occurs as a result of the O'Connor Lab.
